Lawrence University is a private liberal arts college and conservatory of music in Appleton, Wisconsin. 
Founded in 1847, its first classes were held on November 12, 1849. Lawrence was the second college in 
the U.S. to be founded as a coeducational institution. (The first was long-vanished New York Central 
College.)
Lawrence's first president, William Harkness Sampson, founded the school with Henry R. Colman, using 
$10,000 provided by philanthropist Amos Adams Lawrence, and matched by the Methodist church. Both 
founders were ordained Methodist ministers, but Lawrence was Episcopalian. The school was originally 
named Lawrence Institute of Wisconsin in its 1847 charter from the Wisconsin Territorial Legislature, 
but the name was changed to Lawrence University before classes began in November 1849. Its 
oldest extant building, Main Hall, was built in 1853. Lawrence University was the second 
coeducational institution in the country.
Lawrence's first period of major growth came during the thirty-year tenure (1894-1924) of alumnus 
Samuel G. Plantz as president, when the student body quadrupled, from 200 to 800.
From 1913 until 1964, it was named Lawrence College, to emphasize its small size and liberal arts 
education focus. The name returned to Lawrence University when it merged with Milwaukee-Downer 
College. The state of Wisconsin then purchased the Milwaukee-Downer property and buildings to 
expand the campus of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Initially, the university designated 
two entities: Lawrence College for Men and Downer College for Women. This separation has not 
lasted in any material form, though degrees are still conferred "on the recommendation of the 
Faculty of Lawrence and Downer Colleges" and the university by-laws still make the distinction.
During World War II, Lawrence College was one of 131 colleges and universities in the nation that 
took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program, which offered students a path to a Navy 
commission.
The Lawrence Conservatory of Music, usually referred to as "the Con", was founded in 1874. Lawrence 
offers two degrees: a Bachelor of Arts and a Bachelor of Music. It also offers a five-year dual 
degree program, where students can receive both B.A. and B.Mus. degrees.
Freshman Studies at Lawrence is a mandatory two-term class, in which all students study the same 
selected 11 classic works of literature, art, and music, the list varying from year to year. 
President Nathan M. Pusey is credited with initiating the program in 1945, although Professor 
Waples chaired the Freshman Studies Committee and was responsible for implementing the program. 
The program continues to this day, despite being temporarily suspended in 1975.
In 2005, LU initiated a capital campaign called "More Light!", which aimed at raising $150 million. 
By October 2011 the college had raised $160,272,839, with the conclusion event held on October 28, 
2011. In January of 2014, LU embarked on a new capital campaign called "Be The Light!". Upon the 
conclusion of the campaign on December 31, 2020, more than $232,613,052 had been raised in total 
toward four campaign priorities: Lawrence Fund, Full Speed to Full Need, Student Journey, and 
Campus Renewal.
Lawrence University is part of the Oberlin Group, a consortium of liberal arts college libraries.
The traditions and heritage of Milwaukee-Downer are woven into the Appleton campus, from the grove 
of hawthorn trees (called Hawthornden) between Brokaw and Colman halls, to the sundial on the back 
of Main Hall, to the bestowing upon each class a class color and banner.
The Lawrence Dean of Women was referred to as the "Dean of Downer", but when the offices of Dean 
of Men and Dean of Women were merged to form the Dean of Students, the substantive duties of the 
"Dean of Downer" came to an end; the title is still borne by a senior female professor, but her 
only duty is to carry the Downer Mace in academic processions. For many years the women's choir 
was called the Downer Chorus. At one time the BA was conferred upon women in the name of "Downer 
College of Lawrence University" and upon men in the name of "Lawrence College of Lawrence 
University"; now all B.A. degrees are conferred in the name of "Lawrence & Downer Colleges of 
Lawrence University." (The B.Mus. degree is from "the Lawrence University Conservatory of Music.)
Lawrence University operates on a trimester calendar. The academic year runs from mid-September to 
mid-June. The student/faculty ratio at Lawrence is 9:1.[12] Lawrence grants Bachelor of Arts and 
Bachelor of Music degrees, with a double degree possible. Lawrence offers a number of cooperative 
degree programs in areas such as engineering, health sciences and environmental studies.
The college offers majors in most of the liberal arts. The school also offers the option of 
interdisciplinary areas of study and allows students to design their own majors. All students 
are required to take Freshman Studies, which introduces students to broad areas of study and 
provides a common academic experience for the college. Lawrence's freshman studies program 
focuses on a mixture of Great Books and more contemporary, influential works. The 2013-2014 
list included Plato's Republic and Alison Bechdel's Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic.
The school has an independent study option that allows students to design their own courses. 
This allows students to explore academic interests not covered by Lawrence's classes or to 
explore topics more deeply. Over 90% of the students take advantage of the independent study 
program.
The Lawrence University Conservatory of Music was founded in 1874 and has been a part of 
Lawrence University ever since. The Conservatory offers Bachelor of Music degrees in Performance, 
Theory/Composition, Music Education, and a five-year double degree option that grants both a 
BM degree from the Conservatory and a BA degree from the College. Approximately 25% of the 
Lawrence student body, or 350 students, is in the Conservatory. The Conservatory has three 
choirs, two bands, two jazz ensembles, a symphony orchestra, an improvisation collective, 
five world music ensembles, and numerous chamber music groups.
The 84-acre (34 ha) campus is located in downtown Appleton, divided into two parts by the Fox 
River. The academic campus is on the north shore of the river, and the major athletic facilities 
(including the 5,000-seat Banta Bowl) are on the southeast shore. Lawrence also has a 425-acre 
(1.7 km2) northern estate called Björklunden (full name: Björklunden vid sjön), which serves as 
a site for retreats, seminars, concerts, and theatrical performances. It contains a chapel for 
weddings. Donald and Winifred Boynton of Highland Park, Illinois, donated the property in Door 
County to Lawrence in 1963.
In the mid-1980s, the Physics Department built a $330,000 small laser laboratory (known as the 
"laser palace"), which includes 800 5 mW small lasers and more than 500 mirrors.
In 2009, Lawrence opened the Richard and Margot Warch Campus Center, a gathering place for 
students, faculty, staff, alumni, and guests from the Fox Cities community. The 
107,000-square-foot (9,900 m2) building is situated on the Fox River on the site of the former 
Hulburt House. The Warch Campus Center includes a cinema, campus dining services, campus 
mailboxes, and various meeting and event spaces. The building has earned a LEED Gold 
certification for meeting sustainability goals in energy conservation, environmental 
friendliness, and green building.
The college has a long history of razing buildings on its campus, because of the limited land 
available for constructing new buildings. Many buildings on campus are built on the site of 
former buildings. 
Lawrence enrolls about 1,500 students who hail from nearly every U.S. state. The total enrollment 
in academic year 2010-11 was 1,566 students, the largest student body in Lawrence University's 
history. Over 75% of the students identify as white, about 12% are international students, and about 
25% of students study in the conservatory of music. In the fall of 2014, a quarter of the 
incoming class were domestic students of color.
Lawrence students have been named Rhodes Scholars seven times. Since 1976, 57 students and nine 
faculty have received Fulbright Scholarships. Since 1969, 73 students have been named Watson 
Fellows.
At the beginning of every academic year in September, incoming freshmen arrive a week before 
returning students to partake in Welcome Week. During Welcome Week, various activities are 
planned in order to help the incoming class get to know one another and to help them acclimate 
to college life. During the first night of Welcome Week, students and their parents attend 
the President's Welcome, which concludes with the traditional matriculation handshake, where 
every member of the incoming class shakes hands and exchanges words with the university's 
president.
During the fall term, the on-campus fraternity Beta Theta Pi hosts the annual Beach Bash. 
For this event, the brothers of ΒθΠ shovel approximately 14 tons of sand into the fraternity 
house basement, and install a boardwalk and a lifeguard station that doubles as a DJ booth.
This tradition was skipped in 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During spring term, Lawrence hosts a music festival, LU-aroo (a play on words on the popular 
music festival Bonnaroo). Held on the quad, the festival features many talented student bands, 
both from the college and the conservatory. In 2016, the musician The Tallest Man on Earth 
played at the festival.
Also during spring term, many seniors participate in the Senior Streak, which typically 
happens during the eighth week of the term. The goal of the senior streak is to provide 
seniors with one last opportunity to let loose before finals, graduation, and post-college 
life. Although rumor says that the senior streak was created as a result of former president 
Richard Warch's aversion to the activity, this has been proven to be false. Students, often 
coming from Lawrence's on-campus bar, the Viking Room, strip their clothes and run around 
the area of Main Hall, as one last hurrah before finals and graduation.
The student newspaper, The Lawrentian, has been published for over a century.
Lawrence University hosts the Great Midwest Trivia Contest webcast every January over the 
college radio station WLFM.
Lawrence University's intercollegiate athletic teams, known as the Vikings since 1926, 
compete in the Midwest Conference in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) 
Division III. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, fencing, football, 
golf, ice hockey, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, and track & field; women's sports 
include basketball, cross country, fencing, golf, soccer, softball, swimming & diving, 
tennis, track & field, and volleyball.
In 2005-06, the men's basketball team was ranked first in Division III for much of the 
season, after starting the season unranked. The Vikings were the only undefeated team 
in all divisions of college basketball for the last six weeks of the season, ending 
with a record of 25-1. Star forward Chris Braier won the Josten's Award as the top 
player in the country for both playing ability and community service. Coach John Tharp 
was named Division III Midwest Coach of the Year. Beginning in 2004, Lawrence 
qualified for the Division III national tournament in five of the next six years 
(2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009). Their best result was in 2004, advancing to the 
quarterfinals (Elite 8), but fell to eventual national champion Wisconsin-Stevens 
Point by a point in overtime at Tacoma, Washington.
In 2011, Lawrence's men's cross country team won the Midwest Conference championships 
for the first time since 1985, beating Grinnell College and ending its 14-year winning 
streak.
Lawrence was ranked 56th on the 2013 U.S. News: List of Best U.S. National Liberal Arts 
Colleges.